welcome to talkcast and for a reaction
episode if you're watching this on
YouTube then perhaps the thumbnail will
give you some indication of what this
episode is about among my most popular
episodes are the ones where I take some
other podcast and React to what has been
said in that particular podcast indeed
my most watched video ever was where I
reacted to the podcast that Sam Harris
did with David Deutsch or the second one
they did anyway I've reacted to things
that Joe Rogan has said I've reacted
things that Jordan Peterson and Dave
Rubin have said I've reacted to euron
Brook and Sam Harris on other occasions
as well and so this continues along that
theme I've chosen this one in particular
for two reasons one I listened to the
entire Lex Friedman and Sam Harris
second conversation myself just off my
own back no one prodded me to do it it
was four and a half hours long I mean
that's even longer than the kind of
thing that Joe Rogan does and Joe Rogan
does epically long podcasts so the first
thing I have to do is to complement both
Lex and Sam for their endurance I don't
think I could do something like that if
nothing else their bladders deserve
praise uh how they sat there for that
long I don't know perhaps they took a
break I didn't see any Cuts in the video
but that said there were times when I
was only listening so perhaps I missed
the cuts perhaps they did take a break
four and a half hours sitting in one
place just talking amazing I've had
multiple requests from fans to react to
different parts of the podcast in
particular their stuff about AGI and AI
but lately I've been saying so much on
that topic in particular on air chat
Navarre vacant's new app try and get a
hold of that air chat which is spelled
just the way it sounds here's the icon
get air chat by searching on Google and
you can hear myself and Naval and lots
of other people talking about lots of
these topics all the topics that I talk
about on topcast all of the time now
it's an ongoing conversation there so I
would urge people to if you'd like to
get involved get out so there's that so
that fact alone means
not that I'm tired of the AI AGI debate
that goes on seemingly continuously on
Twitter now but I think I've said enough
for the moment and there are a lot of
parts of this conversation between Sam
and Lex that I could respond to but
instead I've chosen a very esoteric part
right near the end and this has all
sorts of liabilities I suppose one
they've been talking already for four
hours so I'm sure they're both becoming
tired by this point and so perhaps their
thinking is starting to slow down a
little Sam already is extremely
deliberate and rather ponderous in the
way that he speaks you know that's a
great thing he carefully considers what
he's going to say he's slow under normal
circumstances but I can imagine after
four hours he's going to slow down even
further and he seems to and so perhaps
I'm being unfair and reacting to this
part because it seems like he's getting
he might be getting mentally tired is
what I'm saying so we have to keep that
in mind as I respond to what is being
said here you I've picked a section that
runs for about 20 minutes but I'm
certainly not going to get through the
entire 20 minutes they're talking about
possibility and actuality they're
touching on free will they're touching
on the many worlds they're talking about
all the things the problems I should say
that a theory of philosophy in physics
like Constructor Theory would solve for
them as would an understanding
appreciation over endorsement of the
everettian interpretation of quantum
theory otherwise known as the many
worlds interpretation
they deny the facility of this
particular interpretation they deny the
facility of that understanding of
quantum theory and so therefore
the conversation becomes confused and so
what I want to do is to listen to what
they say in their own words so I'm not
going to be putting words in their mouth
this is what Sam thinks this is what Lex
thinks no you can hear what they say I'm
not not summarizing them I'm not
paraphrasing them here they are in their
own words and I'm going to set that
aside my understanding mind you this is
my understanding and errors are my own
as always
of how the Multiverse can solve these
problems and also the deeper Theory
still should it become a fully fledged
Theory of physics Constructor theory is
really the way to go to understand the
nature of possibility in the physical
world so without any further
introduction let's just dive straight in
and for a bit of context they're part
way through well actually coming to the
tail end of the conversation they had
about Free Will proper and uh
interestingly enough I'm ignoring most
of that the reason I'm ignoring most of
that is because again just like the AI
AGI thing I've said so much on topcast
about this before that my previous
resources exist there if you want to
know my views on this
I will be nonetheless touching on
Freewheel as they get to it you know
sort of summary type way a summary of my
own perspective but for the full
perspective those videos and podcasts
are already out there and my blog posts
on this extensive and I've written and
spoken a lot about this so let's not
spend too much time on that but we're
picking it up where Sam segues from a
discussion about Freewheel into this
notion of voluntary and involuntary
behavior and then we get into
possibility actuality and probability so
here's Sam and Lex
again even when you're doing things this
does not negate the difference between
voluntary and involuntary Behavior it's
like
I can voluntarily reach for this but
when I'm paying attention I'm aware that
everything is just happening like just
the intention to move is just Horizon
right and
I'm in no position I don't know why I
didn't arise a moment before or a moment
later or a moment or or you know
50 stronger or weaker or you know so as
to be ineffective or to be doubly
effective where I lurched for it versus
I moved slow I mean I'm not
I can never run the counter factuals I
can never I mean all all this opens the
door to a
and even more disconcerting picture
along the same lines which is
subsumes this conversation about Free
Will and it's the question of whether
anything is ever possible
so let's deal with this issue of
voluntary and involuntary Behavior
this is part of Sam Harris's conception
of the non-existence of free will he
says the Free Will doesn't exist but
we can still engage in voluntary
behaviors and involuntary behaviors
also there are choices in the world on
Sam's account
also as a matter of subjective
experience he says there is no self
so we have to keep all of that in mind
so my what I hear when Sam says what he
said just then about volunteering and
voluntary behavior is that he doesn't
always know why he does a thing that he
does
okay he can't give an explicit account
of why he always does what he does or
indeed how he does it picking something
up he says is a mystery to him at times
so there are things he does not know
about his own behavior but what I want
to say is one's ignorance or one's
professed ignorance on any matter is no
proof that one is not creative or
creatively generating choices or as I
say has free will it just means you
don't know something and this
distinction between voluntary and
involuntary so voluntary means nothing
or no one is forcing Sam to do a
particular thing but if he's not being
forced then What entity is doing the
action performing the action
him but he has no self
simultaneously Sam wants to say so he
voluntarily can do something but also as
a matter of subjective experience there
is no self the self is an illusion so it
can't be himself making the movement
so what is well let's try and steal man
this he says that the intention to move
just arises okay but where does that
arise I would say it arises within one's
self
what else might happen if the attention
doesn't arise should the intention
always be there if it's not going to
arise
so it seems like intentions are real and
Sam agrees with this and the intention
arises but he doesn't know how or why
the intention arises and this leads him
to think that Free Will doesn't exist
because the intention arises he can't
give an account for that therefore he's
not responsible for the attention all
right he didn't choose for the intention
to arise therefore he's not freely
choosing the intention but that's just
to say he doesn't know why the intention
arose but again that is not proof that
the intention is not just him doing
something it's not a proof that the
intention is not his that he himself is
having the intention just because he Sam
Harris cannot provide an account for it
there might be a deeper explanation of
what's going on and if you delved into
it perhaps by exploring one's
subconscious you could figure out an
explanation for the intention arising
but then of course he would say well
those subconscious by a very definition
are not part of you your intentions you
didn't choose those therefore you don't
have any free will but I want to say the
subconscious is also part of you what
you are on my account of what you are a
mind a creative mind and you can't give
a holistic account a full account a
complete account of what's going on in
your mind some of it is opaque to you
but that doesn't mean it's not part of
you you just not might not be conscious
of it our minds can be mysterious to us
we create knowledge after all and this
active creation is something we do not
understand well
inspiration we don't understand it why
do we why are we inspired to do a
particular thing at times motivation
we're motivated to do some things and
bored about other things and not
motivated to do them curiosity curious
about some things and not about others
we're very different in this respect we
don't understand at times why these
feelings arise within us but they do
arise within us and I would say they're
part of us
kind of defining characteristics of what
it is to be an individual agent in the
world these things are part of what
makes up ourselves of course I'd say an
important part of defining ourselves is
the fact that we are Universal
explainers but that's more about
defining what a person is as distinct
from any other entity in the universe
you yourself are distinct from other
people not only because you're spatially
located in a different place but also
because of these intentions your
Curiosities your motivations your
interests what you find fun and all that
sort of stuff that makes up your
personality your very person your mind
what you are you exist as a self and as
I say in other moods and you hear Sam
talk about free will he does say that
choice is there and the world Choice
exists and choice is real but I want to
ask
who or what does the choosing if the
self doesn't exist if you don't exist
then it can't be you this non-existent
thing making the choice so what does
the laws of physics the outworkings of
the laws of physics neural firings now
it's all reductive it's a kind of
justificationist foundationalism if he
Sam does not know the answer to
something about his mind he wants to put
it down to well that's just proof I have
no control over the thing and therefore
there's no free will but we have
intentions to do stuff all the time and
then we change our minds we change them
but he would say we don't choose to
change our minds yet I think we do
because we create knowledge of something
better of course he would deny that we
do any such thing because strictly on
his account we don't exist it's just as
I say neural firings but I want to say
that this in a sense is what we are this
is the self this neural firing if you
like is one description at one level of
what a mind is I think it's the wrong
level of analysis it's kind of a
physicalism because a more parsimonious
way to speak about all this is just to
say we are Minds
creative explainers and Minds can be
represented in brains as neural firings
in fact it's the only minds that we know
of right now let's continue with their
conversation like what if this is a
question I I haven't thought a lot of
about it but
it's been a few years I've been kicking
this question around
so I mean what if only the actual
is possible what what if there was what
if it was do we live with this feeling
of possibility we live with a sense that
Mateo so you know I have two daughters
I could have had a third child right so
what does it mean to say that I could
have had a third child or he's like do
you don't have kids I don't think so not
that I know of yes so the possibility
might be there so what do we mean when
we say
you could have had a child or
you might you you might have a child in
the future like what what what is the
space in real what's the relationship
between possibility and actuality
and reality is there a reality in which
non-actual things
are nonetheless real
okay so I think he begins strongly there
but then he confuses himself
yes it's true for not from an objective
God's eye view in some sense only the
actual ever happens but for a person for
an individual person for a subject from
the perspective of that person or an
observer if you'd like only a tiny
sliver of the possibilities I ever
experienced
or we might say actualized in their
lives
what the laws of physics permit but what
the laws of physics permit happens
somewhere
but there is a caveat here and well let
me go through this and I'll I'll explain
this at some length
errors my own as always I may be
stepping too far in particular areas I'm
not saying at all as always that David
Deutsch would endorse any of this or
Chiara maleto or any genuine expert in
Constructor Theory or David Wallace an
expert in an understanding of ever-ready
and quantum theory so take this as
a lay person interested in this
particular stuff explaining their
understanding of the place of
possibility and the possibility of free
will in a reality governed by quantum
theory vanilla quantum theory I'll use
my Trope example the kind of Trope
example that annoys everyone and but
whatever okay it is it's useful people
get it if you've got two drinks before
you and you want to have one of them and
your choice is tea and coffee and you
only choose one of them you don't take
both of them well it really is the case
that according to physics quantum
physics if you like unitary quantum
mechanics the unitary quantum mechanics
just says that if the formalism says
that a thing happens then it happens or
some call it the everettian
interpretation okay they might be subtly
different anyway the quantum Multiverse
the many worlds according to Quantum
Mechanics the most vanilla version with
no added assumptions about collapse or
whatever according to this theory if
you're like me then in most of the time
you choose T and when that choice is
offered to you you know tea or coffee
you go I'd rather have tea so on quantum
mechanics
the whole of physical reality really
does partition itself into what we call
measures
different proportions
say and I'm making up these numbers but
they make the point because I'm
generally a person who chooses tea then
when offered tea and coffee in ninety
percent of the universes 90 of the
Multiverse where this choice is
happening where I exist then in 90
percent of physical reality that becomes
a place where I've had tea
in
9.99999999999 imagine those nines gone
for about a hundred decimal places
ascent
that's where I have coffee
and we've got a missing amount 0.000
imagine a hundred zeros and then one
percent that tiny tiny fraction is where
something genuinely bizarre happens in
fact it might be more than a hundred
zeros maybe a thousand maybe ten
thousand a tiny tiny fraction barely
worth worrying about except that it
actually happens what is that something
bizarre consistent with the laws of
physics actually happens could possibly
happen therefore actually happen
somewhere in the Multiverse
well this is where the weird thing
happens the weird thing is you're
offered tea you're offered coffee you
take tea because you're normally a
person who takes tea 90 of the universe
is like that and almost 10 but not quite
of the other universes you have coffee
but that missing amount that tiny tiny
fraction is where the weird thing
happens like
the coffee or the tea rather one of them
turns into Coca-Cola
and you get neither to your coffee or it
turns into orange juice
or turns into a rabbit that hops away or
I turn into a rabbit or something else
just as bizarre happens because of the
the motion of particles by chance doing
something exceedingly unlikely but
nevertheless possible and the possible
here is actual as strange as that sounds
but it's considerably less strange than
your Consciousness controls physical
reality at the quantum level and so a
special kind of physics is required to
explain your mind and your observations
causing physical reality to have the
form that it does I find that far more
bizarre and another aside on this while
we're at it if during reaching for my
tea I have a thought I I think I'm going
to play a little joke here and I say
abracadabra over my tea and coffee
before I pick them up then in almost all
of the universes of the same proportion
just as before in 99.999 nine percent
you know a thousand nines after that
percent absolutely nothing unusual
happens I say abracadabra and nothing
happens why should it magic doesn't work
but in 0.000 you get my point a thousand
zeros one percent of universes after I
say abracadabra something weird happens
orange juice appears that wasn't there
before or the tea turns into a rabbit or
the coffee does whatever something
really bizarre happens immediately after
I say abracadabra well okay now to me or
anyone watching me it might seem as if
I've just performed literal magic but I
haven't my saying Abracadabra and the T
spontaneously turning into orange juice
or whatever else weird thing happened
those two things had nothing to do with
one another
the magic words did not cause the change
in the tea to orange juice and I can
test this simply by just saying
Abracadabra again in an attempt to
change the orange juice let's say back
to tea and guess what nothing will
happen NADA if I could stand there the
rest of my life saying Abracadabra and
nothing will happen and across the
Multiverse the same is true again in
99.99 a thousand nines percent of the
universes but once more once more again
having just said Abracadabra over this
tea coffee situation and one of them
turns into orange and there's 0.000 you
know thousand zeros one percent of the
universes the second time I do it in
exactly the same proportion of universes
on the second time around nothing
happens but in 0.99 a thousand times
percent
two times in a row you get orange juice
you get something weird happen the
second time you say abracadabra the
probability of that happen is the
probability the 0.0 a thousand zeros one
percent multiplied by zero point zero
zero one percent you get my meaning it's
getting even more unlikely more
ridiculously unlikely that each time I
say abracadabra following that something
weird happens and so it goes it would
appear that if you have these sequence
of coincidences magic appears to work
but it doesn't it only appears to and
actually by the way this sequence of
coincidences does not count as a
universe because these things are not
causally connected this is not what we
regard a universe as being a consistent
history
this is not a history this is an
extremely unusual sequence of
coincidences that can't be explained
except by being a sequence of
coincidences which is not what history
is about history is about one thing
causing another having good explanations
for things then this is the only good
explanation there is sequence of
coincidences not that magic exists not
that every time Brett says Abracadabra
tea turns into orange juice and orange
juice turns back into tea or whatever
the Abracadabra appears to be doing
something weird those situations
basically infinitesimally happen almost
never happen it's a sharply tapering
measure of the Multiverse where the
events aren't causally connected as I
say this sequence of remarkable
coincidence is a sequence of among the
least likely things in existence
possible according to the laws actual
therefore somewhere in the Multiverse
but of vanishingly tiny proportion of
the whole and each time the magic words
appear to do something they the next
time they are said and the overwhelming
majority of universes afterwards nothing
special happens but on the other hand
when we humans actually cause stuff to
happen like when we create knowledge
explanatory knowledge crucially and the
knowledge is something like scientific
knowledge then the measure of universes
where that thing happens grows across
the Multiverse it gets replicated it's
not a tiny proportion of universes for
example where Newtonian physics and
Rockets are found but a growing
proportion Newton's Discovery causes
many things to happen such as people
rocketing their way to the Moon let's
say and reliably so each time a rocket
aims at the Moon it gets there rather a
lot of the time and the more Rockets aim
for the moon the more get there over
time as well because of error correction
and knowledge creation and knowledge
growth both in our part of the
Multiverse and the Multiverse as a whole
this is these are universes
this is precisely the opposite to the
situation where magic words are set over
the T and it turns into oranges
situation in both cases something
possible is happening and is actual but
only in one of them does the proportion
of the Multiverse grow in the other it
tapers off to nothingness now at this
point to many people the account I have
just given seems so fantastic and I
agree it is fantastic but it seems so
fantastic that it could not possibly be
true but here we just have to appeal to
the fallacy of incredulity you're
thinking it's too amazing to be true is
not a refutation of the fact that it is
flat earthers find it fantastic that the
world is approximately spherical
creationists find it fantastic that the
simple process of evolution by natural
selection can cause over millions of
years human beings to descend from
monkeys so to speak and monkeys from
bacteria our deepest theories are
counter-intuitive and your inability to
imagine how it could be so is not a
refutation of the fact that it is so
everything possible is actual
but this is not the same as saying that
only the actual is possible not the same
at all in some universe of the same
proportion as the tea turning into the
oranges kind a child scribbling what
they think of as pretty lines on paper
actually ends up writing down the
successor Theory to Quantum Theory and
general relativity or at least symbols
representing it by chance I'll have more
to say on this particular example at a
later date but to my mind the child has
not just spontaneously generated
knowledge no one knows it only if
someone was to come along and understood
what was written there which happens in
some tiny proportion of universes would
that count as knowledge not created by
the child on the paper but in the mind
of the person interpreting what they see
and so nothing is violated there in
terms of knowledge generation but I'll
come back to that one because it's an
interesting case okay back to Sam and
Lex now
and so there we have other categories of
like non
concrete things we have things that
don't have spatial temporal Dimension
but they're nonetheless they they
nonetheless exist so like you know in
the integers right so numbers
the reality of abstractions so this
would be this part of Sam's discussion
would be so well informed by the
beginning of infinity the chapter on the
reality of abstractions or chapter 10 of
the the fabric of reality on the nature
of mathematics this kind of thing would
um yeah enhance what he is saying here
because it gets a little confused but no
let's listen to what he says
there's a there's a reality there's an
abstract reality to numbers and this is
it's philosophically interesting to
think about these things so they're not
like in some sense they're
they're
real
and they're just they're not merely
invented by us they're discovered
because they have structure that we
can't impose upon them right it's not
like they're not fictional characters
like you know I mean Hamlet and Superman
also exist in some sense but they exist
at the level of of Our Own
fiction and abstraction but it's like
they're true they're true and false
statements you can make about Hamlet
they're true and false statements you
can make about Superman because our
fiction the fictional worlds we've
created have a certain kind of structure
but again this is all abstract it's like
it's all abstractable from any of its
concrete instantiations it's not just in
the comic books and just in the movies
it's in our you know ongoing ideas about
these characters
but natural numbers or um
the integers don't
function quite that way I mean they're
similar but they also have a structure
that's purely a matter of Discovery it's
not you can't just make up whether
numbers are prime
you know if you give me two integers you
know of a certain size to let's you
mentioned two enormous integers
if I were to say okay well between those
two integers they're exactly 11 prime
numbers right that's a very specific
Claim about which I can be right or
wrong and whether or not anyone knows
I'm writers like that's just there's a
domain of facts there but these are
abstract it's an abstract reality that
relates in some way that's
philosophically interesting you know
metaphysically interesting too
what we call real reality you know the
spatial temporal order
the physics of things
okay as I say by this time in the
interview the discussion between the two
of them Santa's been talking for four
hours which I regard as heroic it seems
like there were no breaks as I say I'm
not sure anyways real reality he says
real reality I think this is confusing
what he means is physical reality uh
there's no real reality it's just
reality okay and it has physical parts
and it has abstract parts so there's a
physical reality and there's abstract
reality there would be no abstract
reality on my view without a physical
reality of some kind okay that's it get
into that debate at some point
nevertheless you can consider something
like my go-to example here is just the
number two
you could write down the numeral for two
or you'd write four over two or
five minus three or fourteen pi over
seven Pi you could go on forever like
this writing down different symbols
instantiations
representations numerals
they all represent the number the number
two those representations are physical
pixels on the screen at the moment so
when I say five minus three you're
hearing sound waves representing the
number two I can't write down the number
two I can only write down symbols
numerals the number itself is the thing
that we abstract out from those
representations
so you're looking at all these things
and the thing that is common between
them is the abstract number two and it's
not physical it's independent of any and
all of them
so where is that number if it exists if
it's real where is it well that's the
wrong question
it Demands a spatio-temporal answer it's
asking for where in space is this thing
or where in time is this thing it's
nowhere in space and time it's an
abstraction it occupies an abstract
space of numbers which is not a place in
space or located a moment in time it
just is and when we start talking about
Spice in this way well we've got a bit
of an issue because
is the physical space really analogous
to this abstract space are we just using
this word space to indicate all of this
variety of stuff the physical space is
just a whole sequence of points if you
like infinitely many a continuum
but the space of numbers is not like
that and so we've got a problem with
language here nevertheless
abstractions are real
in what sense are they real well you
abstract them out from the physical
instantiation of stuff some of them have
this weird existence you know like the
next highest prime numbers I keep saying
hasn't been discovered yet there's only
a highest prime number node at the
moment but the other one all the other
ones that are high the the higher than
it bigger than it exists but where well
they're yet to be found we get to
instantiate them but they exist in
abstract space okay let's keep going but
possibility at least in my view occupies
a different space and this is something
again I my thoughts on this are pretty
in code and I I think I need to talk to
a philosopher of physics and and or
physicist about how this may interact
with with things like the many worlds
interpretation of course yeah that's yes
possibly but
you don't need to talk you could just
read the books that are out there on
this the science of Kenneth can't for
example would be a way to go and
beginning of infinity listen to David's
lecture especially the one on
probability
what he says is possibility at least in
my view quote okay from that audio
snippet there but that's a little bit
like saying evolution in my view or
Pythagoras theorem in my view
but to be fair okay I get people all the
time telling me well quantum mechanics
in my view can't be about parallel
universes okay or at least words to that
effect anyway
well I want to say in return to them and
retort you know that fossils in my view
aren't about dinosaurs what do you think
about that but in those moments you know
usually you just you've got a shrug or
you have to figure out to yourself
whether the Avenues seems promising to
pursue in explaining it a little bit
further people making areas like this is
no sin but I suppose trying to explain
to someone a phenomena they've already
seemed to have indicated that they're
not going to be moved on and that might
be a sin
let's keep going it's an interesting way
right exactly so
I I wonder if discover is in physics
like further proof or more concrete
proof that many world's interpretation
of quantum mechanics has some validity
right if that completely starts to
change things
foreign
you know what I'm gonna say I mean
everything is helped by better
philosophy it really is it clarifies
things you know like how much
how much evidence do you want what does
concrete proof mean firstly concrete
proof of the many world's interpretation
why is it held to a standard different
to every other Theory well we know why
because a bad philosophy chapter 11 I
think at the beginning of infinity
perhaps he just means evidence he wants
more evidence so what do we need though
well perhaps we need AGI able to perform
interference experiments in their own
brains see this video my discussion of
this from the beginning of Infinity
Series the the the Multiverse section of
that perhaps we need Universal quantum
computers whose computations and
calculations and actions could not
possibly be explained without recourse
to a Multiverse a much vast Ensemble of
reality physical reality then exists in
the universe we do observe so to speak I
mean look Fred Hoyle the The Genius of
Fred Hoyle one of the greatest
astrophysics of all time held out until
the end on the Big Bang and he was more
than equipped to understand the theory
and concrete proof of it creationists
are forever demanding more concrete
proof of Darwinism each time we find a
missing link or they think we've just
created two more gaps in the fossil
record of course so there are ways that
people can keep on denying reality if
you're really committed to it which many
physicists seem to be and so even though
you've got you know the famous you know
you know famous people who've got more
Fame than than David Deutsch like Sean
Carroll explaining you know the many
worlds reasonably well in places like
Joe Rogan still now people are not
willing to listen I don't know why what
more concrete proof
that's what you're looking for do you
need but even that's just more
actuality uh yes and no that's even more
just actuality objectively it is
subjectively it's not so what I mean by
that is if you had the God's eye view
then possibility in the Multiverse there
is no possibility everything that
happens actually happens everything that
could happen happens
but for a subject a person experiencing
stuff observing what's going on they
can't observe the entirety of the
Multiverse they they observe their
narrow sliver and so what they
experience is one narrow possibility of
all the possibilities that are
experienced by copies of themselves this
all taked care of a certain kind of
counterfactual about you namely you
could have done otherwise because in
some universes
copies of you did do otherwise
they aren't you I don't regard them as
you you are your conscious self
consisting of infinitely many fungible
instances of yourself what does it feel
like being infinitely many copies of
yourself well just the way it feels
right now and they're differentiating as
a choice exists in the universe and as
you make choices to do stuff you uh
differentiate let's keep going so if I
took that seriously ah sure that's
that's a case of
and and Truth is that happens even even
if the many worlds interpretation isn't
true but we just imagine we have a
physically infinite universe
the implication of infinity is such that
things will begin to repeat themselves
uh yes and no again
um same access point rather often I've
heard other philosophers make this point
as well
but that claim requires an additional
substantive assumption about what the
natural physical reality is just given
that the universe is spatially infinite
that just that fact tells you nothing
about that space you have to add stuff
to your spatially infinite Universe
namely that it's filled with matter
roughly like the matter that's in our
region of this Infinite Space which is
Tiny of course everything's tiny
compared to Infinity
so you would need to say something like
well the university is homogeneous and
isotropic roughly speaking but why think
that how do you know that well you know
you can just add that in it could be the
case though if you've got the spatially
infinite Universe there's a lot of ways
there's an infinite number of ways of
having an an infinite in size Universe
an infinite number of ways to have such
a universe and one of them happens to be
homogeneous and isotropic everywhere
okay the same at all points in the same
in all directions
maybe it's like that but why think that
what's the scientific reason for
thinking that it could just be that the
distant universe is just very different
the further you get away from here the
more and more different it becomes maybe
it's all hydrogen gas expanding at
extremely fast rate so fast that the
hydrogen gas cannot coalesce into stuff
we know the universe is expanding and
expanding at an accelerating rate that's
the best understanding we have at the
moment and if that's true well the
infinite infinitely far from here it's
being ripped apart it's not like you're
going to encounter copies of yourself
if it is a little hydrogen gas out there
we're just an island of complexity
so it doesn't follow no yeah you have to
add to your infinite Universe the fact
that whatever kind of infinity it is
everything that can possibly happen that
does happen
but who knows what obtains beyond what
we can see or what we have evidence of
or even can have evidence of this is
metaphysics again whereas the quantum
Multiverse is plain old vanilla physics
it really is you know the farther you go
in space right so the you know if
if you just head out in One Direction
eventually you're going to meet two
people just like us having a
conversation just like this and you're
going to meet them an infinite number of
times in every you know infinite variety
of permutations slightly different from
this conversation right so I mean
Infinity is just so big that our
intuitions of probability completely
break down
but what I'm suggesting is
maybe probability isn't a thing Infinity
is so big are their intuitions about
probability completely breakdown well
there are many cons of infinity that's
the first thing to say
and especially infinite universe that is
empty of Mata is one thing well it's
filled with better as another what kind
of matter okay is it expanding what
effect does that have
would it preclude you know complex
molecules forming in certain regions of
this spatially infinite Universe there's
a lot of stuff you need to add to this
but he does conclude there
okay let's just let's just recap what he
said
what I'm suggesting is maybe probability
isn't a thing right
well welcome to the club Sam
so I don't know if he's seen David
deutsche's electron probability or my
videos on his lecture
um but that's you know David's
conclusion and I tend to agree it's not
the probability is not a physical Theory
indeed if what actually happens just
happens
then it never probably happens if
everything that happens happens it
doesn't probably happen there's no sense
in which it probably happens so what is
the place for probability there well the
only place for it then is that
subjectively we have ignorance and
therein you get What's called the
decision theoretic argument where you
say well subjectively it's a matter of
being a person if you need to decide on
something or make a guess make a
prediction about what might happen then
the only thing to do is to approximate
what's going on with probabilities all
the while recognizing it's not true in
the same way that Newton's theory of
gravity is just not true but it can help
you with certain stuff it can help you
get to the moon even the fact is that in
our physical reality everything just
happens and probability does not obtain
it's not a thing that governs the
universe in other words right maybe
there's only actuality if there's or
maybe there's only what happens
and at every point along the way
our notion of what could have happened
or what might have happened is just that
it's just a thought about what could
have happened or there's no so it's a
fundamentally different thing if you can
imagine a thing that doesn't make it
real
so they because that's that's where that
possibility exists is in your
imagination right yeah and possibility
itself is a kind of spooky idea because
it it too has a sort of structure
right so like if I if I'm going to say
you know
you could have had a daughter right last
year
um
so we're saying that's that's possible
but not actual
right that is a claim they're things
that
are true and not true about that
daughter right like it has a kind of
structure it's like
so
you can see Sam thinking through this
in depth in real time I think if one's
thoughts are more coherent which is to
say one understands a thing you don't do
that quite so obviously perhaps Sam
already speaks slowly and deliberately
but if you do understand some
explanation any explanation almost on
this kind of thing then it does come to
you somewhat more quickly you can just
say look possibility for you means that
you do what you do in your universe but
there are versions of you elsewhere in
physical reality in other universes part
of some Multiverse which did otherwise
that solves the problem there's
physically real as you they do the thing
you did not do that's what possibility
means a thing is possible if it doesn't
contradict the laws of physics and it
happens somewhere but where that
something happens a lot in the
Multiverse or not May well come down to
whether it depends upon knowledge
creation because if that knowledge is
created in one part of the Multiverse
then it has causal effects on the
structure of the Multiverse and it tends
to get itself copied by the nature of
what it is as knowledge but where it
does not get created well nothing quite
so dramatic happens in that part of the
universe Multiverse I should say and
therefore nothing dramatic changes in
that part of the Multiverse because it
never happened to cause anything
dramatic to happen over there it's where
the knowledge isn't created then yeah
you can just talk about the
deterministic physical laws explaining
the things that come into existence
there and what people there know about
what's going on as possible perhaps and
what people there know of as possible an
actual perhaps
but my thing here is that if you're a
little confused on this and your
thoughts aren't fully coherent I think
it's okay to just say I don't know about
what any of this stuff means but you
know he's muddling through this is fair
enough that Jordan Peterson does the
same thing all the time of course he's
just thinking out loud trying to figure
out in real time in front of the
audience what he even thinks about this
stuff okay that's fine that's the way to
go all right let's keep going I feel
like there's a lot of fog around
that the possibility it feels like
almost like a useful narrative but what
does it mean so like
what does it mean if if we say you know
I just did that but I'm it's conceivable
that I wouldn't have done that right
like it's possible that I I just threw
this cap but I might not have done that
so you're taking it very temporarily
close to the original like what would
appear as a decision
whenever we're saying something is
possible but not actual right like this
thing just happened but it's conceived
it's possible that it wouldn't have
happened or it would have happened
differently
in what does that possibility
consists like where is that what it for
that to be real for the possibility to
be real
what do we what claim are we making
about
the universe what climb are we making
about the universe
we are making the claim that these other
possibilities have actuality but you do
not experience those you experience one
thing of necessity
that's the Multiverse problem solved
let's go to lunch
but also and Sam would be aware of this
I hope you know David Lewis the
philosopher wrote on the plurality of
Worlds a great book it's a philosophical
Treatise and in it he is dealing mainly
with illogically possible other worlds
but the idea with respect to possibility
and counter factuals is the same those
other worlds exist and that solves the
problem now as a matter of physics
Lewis's idea doesn't solve the problem
so that you need Everett but this is all
I would say easily answered given our
modern understanding of quantum theory
what I think it speaks to here is that
Sam and Lex tend to be circling in terms
of psychology what is bad philosophy
they're just unwilling to take the many
worlds seriously the Multiverse quantum
theory even though it would solve the
problem parsimoniously for them here I
mean it solves lots of problems all the
problems in physics that otherwise would
be inexplicable about quantum mechanics
it solves those and by happy coincidence
or not so much coincidence it solves
this issue of possibility
what is physically possible happens not
with equal measure or proportion but it
does happen somewhere with proportion
according to what the laws of physics
say sometimes knowledge is going to be
needed or information is needed in order
for a thing to happen reliably and for
that structure to grow throughout the
Multiverse for to become a larger
proportion of the Multiverse knowledge
has this causal effect it's physically
possible in some world for Einstein's
field equations to have been written in
Sand by the wind on a beach somewhere or
other in ancient Greece that's a
possibility that happens somewhere but
even if Plato himself had come across it
he'd seen those symbols for the field
equations he wouldn't have appreciated
he wouldn't have understood it so it
wouldn't have counted as knowledge there
although if Einstein had have been
walking along a beach and saw his own
field equations there the day before he
wrote them down himself he would have
actually understood them but and here's
the key the knowledge still would need
to have been created by Him in his mind
he had to interpret what he was seeing
in the sand for example so instead of
interpreting the position of Mercury or
the movement of light and so on and so
forth as he did then he would have been
interpreting sand but in the whatever
the case he's constructing the knowledge
himself he is the causal agent in that
case not random motion of particles
without him those squiggles in the sand
really are just squiggles in the sand
and not symbols and equations of general
relativity a person is required
to give symbols meaning well isn't that
an extension of the idea that Free Will
is an illusion that all we have is
actuality that the possibility isn't
right yeah I'm just extending it Beyond
is there human action so if there was
only one universe
and what you did is what you did I think
you can still have free will according
to my conception but it's far easier of
course to know that there isn't only one
universe that copies of you actually did
do otherwise
what free will is about is about
creating the knowledge and you would
still be creating the knowledge even in
a single Universe picture it's you
you're the cause of the thing coming
into existence that's the explanation of
why explanations come into existence is
that people do why because they're
solving problems how do they know
they've got problems because they have a
problem situation they have certain
feelings and emotions and impulses and
they choose choose to solve a particular
thing or not in which case life gets
worse but if they choose and are
motivated to be more motivated then they
will solve their problem Maybe
maybe Sam is somehow grappling with this
notion of the real existence of other
physical realities namely other parts of
the Multiverse this possible and so if
there is the possible in his
new conception perhaps of always is a
merging conception of what reality is
consisting of the possible which is
actual then perhaps this is challenging
his intuitions about free will I'm not
sure I can't of course uh get into his
mind he's his main argument it seems to
me against Free Will isn't to do with
determinism but rather it's to do with
this subjective experience that he
thinks he has of not having free will
okay so that's different ah like it's
it's this goes to the physics of things
this is just everything like we're we're
always telling ourselves a story yeah
that includes possibility possibility is
really compelling for some reason
well yeah what because it's it's
I mean so this yeah I mean this could
sound just academic but it every
backward looking regret or
disappointment and every forward-looking
worry
is completely dependent on this notion
of possibility like every regret is
based on the sense that something else I
could have done something else something
else could have happened every
disposition to worry about the future
is based on the feeling that there's
this range of possibilities it could go
either way
and
you know I I know whether whether or not
there's such a thing as possibility you
know I'm convinced that worry is Almost
Never
psychologically
appropriate because the reality is in
any given moment
either you can do something to solve the
problem you're worried about or not so
if you can do something just do it you
know and if you can't you're worrying is
just causing you to suffer twice over
right you're gonna
you know you're gonna you're gonna get
the medical procedure next week anyway
how much time between now and next week
do you want to spend worrying about it
right it's gonna it's the worry the
worry doesn't accomplish anything so on
that point I couldn't agree more yes
worry and regrets are pointless except
insofar as regret could be a motivation
to learn from a particular thing that
you regret having done worry you might
be giving you information about danger
but if it's a medical procedure then
then you already know about the dangers
then worry is wasted energy okay but
yeah otherwise I I I completely agree
with this this stance on how to be
somewhat more enlightened when
encountering difficulties let's say how
much do physicists think about
possibility well they think about it in
terms of probability
oh
well yeah we know we know what I think
about that I don't think anyone at the
moment thinks more about possibility
than the researchers working on
Constructor Theory then David Deutsche
Cara maletto and their colleagues
constructive theory is the physics of
possibility
what can happen and the impossibility
what can't
and they do not think about it in terms
of probability
more often but probability just
describes
and again this is a place where I might
be out of my depth and need to talk to
somebody to to debunk this but the um do
therapy with a physicist yeah but
probability it seems just describes a
pattern of actuality that we've observed
right I mean we have there are certain
things we observe
and those are the actual things that
have happened
well that's the frequentialist story and
it's false
you think a coin is fair if You observe
that 50 of the time it lands heads and
50 tails okay so do the experiment and
you will find deviations you know you'll
find that 505 times its heads and 495
times its tails out of a thousand throws
so that's not exactly 50 50. it's almost
never exactly 50 50. it's only
approximately so
but you still say the probability is one
and two why well perhaps you say that's
a priori by definition but where does
that come from well if you say
if you could toss it an infinite number
of times you'd approach in the limit 50
50. but what does that mean we're
talking about physics here if you can't
physically do the experiment of tossing
it an infinite number of times then how
does that apply to physical reality what
does it mean to make claims about
physical reality
when it relies upon something you can't
do physically it's impossible to do that
thing
number of times and look at the results
real coins obey quantum mechanical laws
and those are not probabilistic see
Deutsch well my video here
and we have this additional story about
probability I mean there's that we have
the frequency with which things happen
have happened in the past
um
you know I can flip a Fair coin and know
I know in the abstract that I have a
belief that in the limit that those
flips the you know those tosses should
Converge on fifty percent has and 50
Tails I know I have a story as to why
it's not going to be exactly 50 within
any
arbitrary time frame
um
well the Sam's credit here that's an
excellent exposition of the mainstream
view it's completely false but you know
it's very competent
but in reality all we ever have are the
observed tosses
right and then we have an additional
story that oh it came up heads but it
could have come up tails
why do we think that
about that last toss
and what are we claiming is true
about the physics of things
if we say it could have been otherwise I
think we're claiming that probability is
true
that that just it allows us to
have a nice model about the world it
gives us hope about the world yeah
so they need David Deutsch not
necessarily in person just his lecture
on probability or my breakdown that
would fix this that's the Salve that's
the treatment for this melody
what do you want to call it now I could
go on with this for ages it's very um
it's a stop start though as you can see
and it that could get frustrating for
The Listener and the viewer um they do
get to talking about free will again as
I say I've already engaged with Sam's
content on this and so frequently and at
such depth the doing so again would just
be repeating myself
they talk more about the Multiverse it's
confused they mentioned that perhaps
we're kind of like NPCs non-player
characters in a big computer game
which is
again a denial of free will if they're
attempted and I free will but it's also
a denial of humanity it's a denial of
creativity an agency and how we are
special
we humans people are special we are
special I know Lex is on board with this
whole love thing but let's take this
even deeper
we are
beings of cosmic significance the most
important entities in the universe
shaping the evolution of the cosmos for
now locally just here on the surface of
one planet but eventually everywhere
we make decisions to do so we create the
conditions where new choices can be made
I've been through 10 minutes of the
interview here I think that's enough
that gives you a flavor of where I'm
coming from where they're coming from
the central point I want to end with is
that look you can have the Multiverse if
already in quantum mechanics
you can have construct a theory and the
physics of the science of Canon cart
what is possible and impossible and what
happens and what does not you can have
those explanations
of physics and philosophy
or you can just choose to say you don't
know and you can be confused and unsure
you can be lost in the mystery and
grappling at a folk kind of metaphysics
and thinking that your mind and
ignorance about it all and so is
everyone else
but we don't need to be we know
something we have some explanations we
should take those as seriously as we
possibly can now to answer the questions
we have now admit we're ignorant and
we're promising Avenues of research
might be pursued and this is why because
of exactly this it's well worth getting
on board with Constructor theory if
you're someone young thinking about what
area of research you might want to go
into look at constructive theory it can
answer exactly this kind of confusion
and these questions and this open-ended
kind of Meandering through philosophy
and physics without being anchored to an
explanation
an explanation a good explanation allows
you to not simply give answers to stuff
but to see what might come next
but if you're still stuck with the old
questions and not making progress in the
way that has been made by everyday and
quantum theory and constructive theory
on these issues
then you yourself personally as a matter
of personal growth won't make any
advances you'll be confused you don't
want to be you should want to have the
best explanations that are out there but
I loved the interview you know I spent
the four and a half hours listening to
it I should have listened to it on
double speed
but well worth watching or listening to
yourself if you're happen to be a fan of
topcast to see the other side because it
really is the other side on almost
everything not that they're irrational I
think they're rational
I think they're using reason
I think they're just wrong about many of
their explanations because they have the
old explanations the explanations that
that I would say pollute the
intellectual zeit class
and haven't allowed us to move Beyond a
certain kind of stagnation
happily now we've got Naval River Camp
Tim Ferriss promoting these ideas of
David Deutsch and they will get out
there further and perhaps more people
will be less confused about what the
possible and the actual really are and
how so much of this is solved but there
are open-ended questions that can be
answered hopefully one day by construct
a theory we need people to take that
seriously as well until next time
bye-bye
oh
[Music]